ColorNinja Studio 1.2.0 - Windows, Linux, and macOS

NEW IN 1.2.0
Open Filament library in the toolbar to add, edit, duplicate and manage spools.
The first edit creates a ColorNinja copy of an external library; later saves
keep backups. Export your library as HueForge-compatible JSON.

Import profiles names 3D Filament Profiles (3dfilamentprofiles.com) as the preferred
source. Search in your browser, then import copied detail-page text or saved
HTML/CSV. Direct online search is not used. Keep the source URL with your import.

Connect a TD1 or TD1S by USB, open TD1 / TD1S, and measure a filament sample.
Apply its TD to an existing spool or add a new filament. Replacing the profile
color is optional. Device controls include settings, calibration, diagnostics,
backups and firmware maintenance. See docs/filament-management.md.

RETAINED FROM 1.1.6
Compatible whole-region edits now appear in HueForge's SpotFix list. Re-export
an existing .colorninja project to add them to a new HFP. Selections that cannot
transfer exactly retain their appearance in the image; keep your ColorNinja
project for the complete editable history. See docs/region-editing.md.

Borders now have a color selector using the printable colors in your stack and
a visible depth field. Choosing a color sets its layer depth; entering a depth
snaps to the nearest printable layer (0.86 becomes 0.88 mm with 0.16/0.08 layers).
See docs/borders.md.

RETAINED FROM 1.1.5
Lasso and Brush now suppress browser image/text dragging while you hold and draw.
Space-drag and middle-button panning still work. Filament refinement caches
repeated scoring calculations without changing its search settings.

In Export > HueForge project (.hfp), enable Add a border. Choose internal or
external placement and width, match the image depth or set a custom height, then
Refresh preview. Border settings persist with your project; PNG exports remain
image-only. See docs/borders.md and docs/refinement-performance.md.

REGION EDIT
Generate a Color Match or filament-stack Color Pop preview, then click Region
Edit above the result. Lasso several regions, choose a target layer and Assign
layer. Click, Polygon, Box and Brush are also available, with whole-region or
pixel coverage. Refine selections, smooth/flatten heights, clean up speckles,
protect groups, undo/redo and compare Before edits. Done returns to the normal
workspace. Save a .colorninja project to retain exact editable groups; edited
projects require 1.1.0 or later. See docs/region-editing.md for the complete guide.

Base depth now snaps when you leave the field or press Enter. With a 0.16 mm
first layer and 0.08 mm regular layers, 0.86 becomes 0.88 mm. Manual maximum depth
snaps too; automatic depth retains its hard ceiling.

Processing automatically uses multiple CPU cores, with bounded workers and
working-memory estimates. See docs/performance.md for measurements and limits.
In Side by side view, use the two-arrow button beside 1:1 to swap the panes.

Layer planning now explores larger layer transfers and alternative thickness
arrangements. Enabled surface/material/order optimization can also compare
nearby reachable colors and heights within the existing color-error allowance.

Color Match and Color Pop are the current stack workflows. The new channel
workflows are temporarily disabled. Older channel projects open in Color Match
and need a new preview; the original saved file is unchanged.

COLOR MATCH ORDERING
Generate a Color Match preview, then use Tune > Color order. Drag source color
groups into the preferred order: first is bottom, last is top. Arrow buttons
also move groups. Order strength adjusts the preference from 0% (off) to 100%.
Dragging or changing strength recalculates even with Auto preview off. Reset
order returns to automatic color matching. Filament pins, color accuracy,
available blends, and print limits still apply, so some groups may overlap.
Projects and profiles save the requested order and weight. See docs/color-order.md.

Backlit remains available in Layers. Simple reducer and Filament Guide remain
available for image preparation. This release is unsigned. See docs/production-readiness.md for the software
validation scope and remaining physical-print and native-dialog acceptance.

Retained from the prior development build: automatic Color Match layer ordering.
Enable Optimize layer order in Layers. The engine analyzes color regions and
related shades, favors compact accents above surrounding colors, and checks
actual mapped heights even when filaments return. No manual color ordering is
required. Color fit and boundary appearance remain part of the objective.
Enabling starts with a 5% color-score allowance, adjustable in Advanced.
Dev.1 material-reduction settings migrate to this automatic preset. Solid volume
remains a secondary measurement, not the automatic optimization target.
Choose depth automatically now tests shortening interior runs too, checking the
full blend path and appearance before removing layers. Desktop HFP exports use
HueForge Color Match to preserve planned heights; old mesh-mode settings migrate.
See docs/print-optimization.md for the overview and measured comparisons, and
docs/releases/v1.2.0.md for this release's notes.

New in Beta 7: Color Pop keeps selected hues against grayscale. Choose
Workflow > Color Pop > Try demo to compare the full-color poppy with the result.
Pick colors from the original, adjust Similar hues, and inspect Selection.
Prepare a PNG without a library, or use experimental separate height bands
for a filament stack. See docs/color-pop.md for the complete workflow.

Global stack is now named Color Match. Existing projects, presets, and
CLI commands retain their behavior. Color Match exports retain tuned Mesh Core
TDs; Color Pop exports use a separate mesh encoding to preserve their bands.

Review the planned heights and colors in HueForge before printing.

Extract the complete archive for your platform and processor.
Windows x64: open ColorNinja.exe; the GUI needs Microsoft Edge WebView2 Runtime.
Linux x64/ARM64: run ./ColorNinja. Builds target Ubuntu 24.04; install the GUI
runtime with: sudo apt install libgtk-3-0t64 libwebkit2gtk-4.1-0
macOS Intel/Apple Silicon: open ColorNinja.app. Builds are tested on macOS 15.
The packages have no publisher signature and macOS builds are not notarized.
If macOS blocks a verified download, try opening it and then use System Settings
> Privacy & Security > Open Anyway. Python, Node.js, and Go are not required.
On Linux/macOS, convert images with unsupported ICC profiles to sRGB first.
See README.md for platform limits and checksum instructions.

GET STARTED
Open an image or try the built-in artwork. Adjust the color budget and detail
smoothing, compare the result, then choose Export > Full-resolution PNG. Scroll to zoom and drag
to pan. Choose Side by side for separate Original and Result panes with linked
zoom/pan, or Compare for the sliding divider. Fit and 1:1 help inspect detail.
Preview and PNG export use
the same full-resolution processed pixels; no dithering is added.

Original and Result show their unique color counts above the previews. Large
counts use labels such as 32K colors; hover for the exact number. Counts use
visible RGB colors at full resolution, ignoring fully transparent pixels.

Simple reducer starts with one total color limit: 8 means at most 8 colors.
Advanced can restore separate chromatic and neutral budgets; older settings
retain those separate budgets, so 8 per population can produce up to 16 colors.
Switching modes preserves your budget. Built-in presets change the budget only. Saved presets
restore tuning while keeping the current mode. Reset restores mode defaults.

Preserve details is on by default in the processing workflows. It protects small marks
and coherent color groups, and improves constrained color mapping
and stack planning. Turn it off to disable that extra protection; the CLI
equivalent is --preserve-details=false. Smoothing works with either setting,
and smoothing presets leave the checkbox unchanged. Set smoothing to zero to disable only
the smoothing step. Very tight color/filament budgets can still merge features.

Color priority offers Overall balance, Distinctive colors, and Vivid colors.
Try Distinctive colors when similar background shades crowd out important accents.
Vivid favors colorful accents more strongly, without a saturation boost. Both
share the existing color limit across hue families while keeping essential neutral
tones. These choices also influence filament selection and Color Match planning.

For filament guidance, open the Filaments tab and choose your HueForge library.
The usual personal_library.json path is detected automatically on Windows and
macOS (Intel and Apple Silicon) when no library has been selected:
Windows: %APPDATA%\HueForge\Filaments\personal_library.json
macOS: ~/Library/Containers/com.thehueforge.hueforge/Data/Documents/HueForge/Filaments/personal_library.json
You can select another library; your selection is remembered across relaunches.
Only eligible owned colors are used unless you enable additional entries. Your
library is read-only. Open guided PNG output in HueForge for the final print plan.

In the Filaments tab, enable Avoid silk & metallic finishes to keep those
finishes out of Filament Guide and Color Match. It also excludes pearl,
Elixir, and Starlight, checking material names, filament names, and tags.
The option starts off and is saved with library settings and projects.
CLI: --hueforge-avoid-silk-metallic.

Use true black is on by default in filament-guided and Color Match modes.
It models dark, near-neutral filaments named Black as #000000. Turn it off to
use the stored library colors. Your library file and transmission values are
unchanged. The CLI equivalent to turn it off is --true-black=false.

Color Match mode provides an independent approximate layer plan. Review it
before printing. Its optional 16-bit layer map stores literal layer numbers
(0 = transparent); it is not a normalized height image, STL, or G-code.

Color Match > Layers > Choose depth automatically compares
printable depths below your Hard maximum depth (for example 4.0 mm, including
the base). It prefers the thinnest plan within 1% of the best color score found.
With Reduce layer show-through enabled, this allowance uses the combined color
and boundary score. The option may trade color accuracy for cleaner boundaries.
The search is bounded, and deeper ceilings take longer. CLI: add
--hueforge-auto-depth --hueforge-max-depth 4.0 to your stack command.

In the output dock heading, choose Visualize stack. The horizontal Stack
map shows filament runs, predicted layer colors, and mesh targets. Select a
layer to inspect its height, material, TD, and image coverage. Striped mesh
heights are excluded from matching; physical layers still print underneath.

PROJECTS AND PREFERENCES
Color Match can reuse a filament after another color: enable Allow filament
returns under Layers. The budget counts unique spools, while Maximum
filament runs limits swaps. Export > HueForge project (.hfp) configures Mesh
Mode, Mesh Core, width, and detail. Start with Color Match / Match planned layers,
refresh in the dialog, then choose Export HFP. Both cores and
the reduced image are included. See docs/hueforge-project.md for validation.

Ctrl+S saves a portable .colorninja project; Ctrl+Shift+O opens one. New projects
include the source image, filament library snapshot, settings, and current result.
Old .colorninja.json projects still need their originals until saved again.
The export menu also offers ColorNinja project (.colorninja). Enable Also save
project and settings profile to include both beside every exported file.
For example, Totoro_Test1.hfp also saves Totoro_Test1.hfp.colorninja (open with
Open project) and Totoro_Test1.hfp.colorninja-profile.json (use Load profile).
The project contains the image, filaments, settings, and exact result. Exporting
a project adds only its settings profile, without a duplicate project.

Presets & profiles opens from below Workflow. Create, rename, apply, and delete
named settings. Keep current workflow starts enabled; clear it to restore the
preset workflow too. Save profile and Load profile share settings between images.
Profiles do not contain images or library contents. Ctrl+O opens an image, Ctrl+E
exports PNG, and Ctrl+Z / Ctrl+Shift+Z undo / redo settings. Preferences are
saved under %APPDATA%\ColorNinja. Presets store processing options.

COMMAND LINE
colorninja-cli.exe input.jpg -o output.png --colors 8
colorninja-cli.exe --help
Use --force to replace existing output files. The CLI needs no WebView2.

See docs/user-guide.md, docs/architecture.md, and docs/validation.md for help,
processing details, and test scope. LICENSE contains ColorNinja's MIT license.
SHA256SUMS.txt records checksums; THIRD-PARTY-NOTICES.txt contains dependency
licenses. BUILD-INFO.json identifies the original build artifact and toolchain.

CLI portable project: add --colorninja-project design.colorninja.
CLI companion profiles: add --export-profile. Reuse with --settings-profile FILE.
